JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President Trump
meets with Canada's prime
minister, amid growing
concerns over the White House
national security
adviser's connections with
Russia.
Then: rushing to repair a
California dam.
Nearly 200,000 people are forced
to evacuate
as oncoming storms approach.
And on the digital front lines,
how students
are using technology to
investigate human
rights violations in the Middle
East.
HALEY WILLIS, Student: We're
really used to
being able to say, here's this
store, and
you type it into Google, you get
an address,
and you're done.
In Syria, there's not easily
accessible addresses.
There's no Google Street View.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's word from
the White
House tonight that the president
is mulling
the fate of his national
security adviser,
General Michael Flynn.
That follows a day when Mr.
Trump hosted a
new VIP visitor.
John Yang has our report.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Our two nations share much more
than a border.
We share the same values.
JOHN YANG: President Trump may
have been full
of praise for Canada and Prime
Minister Justin
Trudeau, but the policy
differences were clear.
On immigration, Mr. Trump touted
new roundups.
DONALD TRUMP: And I said at the
beginning
we are going to get the bad
ones, the really
bad ones.
We're getting them out.
And that's exactly what we're
doing.
I think that in the end everyone
is going
to be extremely happy.
And I will tell you right now a
lot of people
are very, very happy right now.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump is also
fighting in federal
court to reinstate a ban on
travelers from
seven mostly Muslim countries.
In sharp contrast, Mr. Trudeau
has welcomed
some 40,000 refugees from
war-torn Syria,
but, today, he declined to
criticize Mr. Trump.
JUSTIN TRUDEAU, Canadian Prime
Minister: The
last thing Canadians expect is
for me to come
down and lecture another country
on how they
choose to govern themselves.
My role, our responsibility is
to continue
to govern in such a way that
reflects Canadians'
approach and be a positive
example in world.
JOHN YANG: The two leaders also
talked NAFTA,
the North American Free Trade
Agreement.
JUSTIN TRUDEAU: Millions of good
jobs on both
sides of the border depend on
the smooth and
easy flow of goods and services
and people
back and forth across our
border.
And both President Trump and I
got elected
on commitments to support the
middle class,
to work hard for people who need
a real shot
at success.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump has called
for renegotiating
NAFTA, but, today, he
soft-pedaled that stance.
DONALD TRUMP: We have a very
outstanding trade
relationship with Canada.
We will be tweaking it.
We will be doing certain things
that are going
to benefit both of our
countries.
It's a much less severe
situation than what's
taken place on the southern
border.
JOHN YANG: The president wasn't
asked about
Michael Flynn, his embattled
national security
adviser, and he ignored shouted
questions
after the formal news conference
ended.
The Washington Post reports
that, despite
his earlier denial, Flynn did
talk to the
Russian ambassador to the United
States about
dropping sanctions on Moscow
before the inauguration.
That would have been illegal,
since he was
a private citizen at the time.
In addition, he appears to have
misled Vice
President Pence, who publicly
vouched for
Flynn.
Now the retired general says he
can't recall
if he and the Russian envoy
discussed the
sanctions.
Today, senior Trump Kellyanne
Conway said
Flynn still had the president's
full confidence,
that after senior policy adviser
Stephen Miller
pointedly declined to defend
Flynn over the
weekend.
QUESTION: Would that be
considered a fireable
offense in the Trump White
House?
STEPHEN MILLER, Senior Trump
Policy Adviser:
It's not for me to answer
hypotheticals.
It wouldn't be responsible.
It's a sensitive matter.
General Flynn has served his
country admirably.
He served his country with
distinction.
JOHN YANG: The Kremlin said
again today that
Flynn didn't discuss lifting
sanctions with
the Russian ambassador.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang at the
White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matters took a
different turn
just within the past hour when
White House
Press Secretary Sean Spicer read
a statement
to reporters, saying that the
president is
-- quote -- "evaluating the
situation" regarding
Michael Flynn and he is speaking
with Vice
President Pence about it.
In the day's other news: The
U.S. Senate moved
to confirm two more Trump
Cabinet nominees
this evening.
They are former Goldman Sachs
banker Steve
Mnuchin for secretary of the
treasury, and
Dr. David Shulkin to head the
Department of
Veterans Affairs.
Senators grappled this afternoon
over Mnuchin's
record at OneWest Bank, when it
foreclosed
on thousands of homes.
SEN.
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D), Rhode
Island: I simply
cannot forgive somebody who took
a look at
that banking crisis, who took a
look at the
pain that Wall Street had sent
in a wave across
all of America and thought, ah,
here's a great
new way to make money,
foreclosing on people.
Done.
I'm out.
Sorry, can't vote for somebody
like that.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah: They have
essentially
thrown everything, including the
kitchen sink,
at this nominee in a desperate
attempt to
block his confirmation.
Well, so far, Mr. President,
nothing has worked.
That's because none of the
allegations that
my colleagues have raised can
withstand even
a modest amount of scrutiny.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Shulkin, the
Veterans nominee,
is a former Obama administration
official
and has had greater bipartisan
support.
President Trump vowed today to
-- quote -- "deal
with North Korea," after it
test-fired a new
type of solid-fuel ballistic
missile early
Sunday.
He didn't elaborate.
North Korean state TV today
released video
of the launch.
A U.S. tracking of the
intermediate-range
missile showed it traveled about
310 miles,
before landing in the Sea of
Japan.
A powerful storm dumped two feet
of snow or
more on states along the
Northeast Seaboard
today.
The storm blasted its way from
Upstate New
York to Maine, touching off car
crashes and
closing roads and hundreds of
schools.
Crews worked to dig out streets,
as the snow
kept coming.
MAN: Our biggest concern moving
forward is
what's happening with all this
snow.
We're worried about snowplow
drivers blocking
vents or snow falling off of
roofs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The storm is
expected to ease
tonight, but coastal towns are
bracing for
flooding.
A federal judge in Washington,
D.C., has denied
the latest bid by two Sioux
Indian tribes
to block completion of the
Dakota Access oil
pipeline.
The judge ruled that there's no
immediate
risk as long as oil is not yet
running through
the line.
The tribes say the pipeline will
endanger
water supplies and cultural
sites, and they
vow to pursue the case.
On Wall Street today, financial
stocks led
a broad advance.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 142
points to close at 20412,
another new Dow
record.
The Nasdaq rose 29, and the S&P
500 added
12.
They're still buzzing about the
Grammy Awards
and a banner night for Adele.
She won for song and record of
the year with
"Hello," and album of the year,
"25."
It came at the expense of
Beyonce, who won
instead for best contemporary
urban album
with "Lemonade."
But it fueled new criticism that
black artists
are overshadowed, and Adele said
later that
Beyonce deserved the album
award.
All this on the same day a
seven-time Grammy
Winner, Al Jarreau, died in Los
Angeles, just
two days after announcing his
retirement.
Jarreau was lauded for his deft
vocals and
earned critical acclaim in R&B
and pop as
well as jazz.
His best-known hits included
1981's "We're
in This Love Together."
Al Jarreau was 76 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
reports of
the president's National
Security Council
in disarray; erosion at a
California lake
forces nearly 200,000 to
evacuate; rare video
showing life under the terror
group Boko Haram;
and much more.
It's been less than a month
since Donald Trump
took office, but already there
are numerous
reports that the National
Security Council,
which advises the president on
key foreign,
military and intelligence
issues, is in disarray.
The leader of the NSC, retired
Army General
Michael Flynn, has come under
increasing criticism
for his contacts with Russia's
ambassador
to the U.S.
We turn now to Leon Panetta.
He served as the director of the
CIA and secretary
of defense during the Obama
administration.
He also served as White House
chief of staff
for President Clinton.
And David Sanger, he covers
national security
for The New York Times.
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
David Sanger, I'm going to start
with you.
You and your colleagues at The
New York Times
wrote a pretty remarkable story
yesterday
about -- well, you can't use any
words other
than disarray, chaos, inside the
National
Security Council.
Given that, and the events of
today, where
do things stand?
DAVID SANGER, The New York
Times: Well, I
think that everybody in the
National Security
Council is wondering when
they're going to
begin to get to what the council
is supposed
to be doing, which is coordinate
among the
different agencies of
government, bring in
intelligence, debate policy.
And several things have gotten
in the way
of doing that, Judy.
The first is that, as you
reported before,
General Flynn has been under
this cloud and
investigation.
And now we hear just a little
while ago that
President Trump and Vice
President Pence are
considering his fate, that just
an hour after
we were told that he's got the
president's
full confidence.
The second thing that is going
on is that
the staff itself is a little bit
paranoid
right now.
They know that Mr. Flynn has
talked about
starting an insider threat
program.
That seems to them to be an
invitation for
their e-mails to be monitored,
their cell
phones to be watched.
We don't know that any of that
is going to
happen, but it gives you a sense
of the mood.
And the third thing is that many
of the people
on the NSC, this body that is
supposed to
coordinate all this different
policy, come
from the agencies, and they feel
as if they
have been frozen out.
And yet there is no one above
them who has
got a clear job responsibility.
So I would say that, for an
operation that
is supposed to run like a
business, it's not
running much like a business.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there's a
lot to tackle
there.
But, Secretary Panetta, I want
to go first
to the fate of Michael Flynn,
the general
who is the president's national
security adviser.
As we have been reporting and as
David just
said, the president himself
issued a statement
through his press secretary
tonight saying
that he's talking to the vice
president about
what to do.
Is what General Flynn reportedly
did, talking
to the Russian ambassador to the
U.S. before
President Trump takes office
about what to
do about Russian sanctions, is
that something
that is just off -- should be,
frankly, off-limits
for someone in his position,
advising the
president-to-be?
LEON PANETTA, Former U.S.
Secretary of Defense:
Well, there's a lot for the
president and
the vice president to consider
here.
I think first and foremost is,
one of the
principal qualities that you
need as national
security adviser is trust, the
trust of the
president.
And that depends on truth and it
depends on
honesty.
And if, indeed, the national
security adviser
didn't tell the truth to the
vice president,
and the vice president in turn
went out to
the American people and said
that he had had
no such conversations with the
Russian ambassador,
I think that's a serious matter,
and one for
them to think seriously about.
With regards to the substance of
what was
discussed, you know, it's hard
to tell exactly
what these conversations were
about.
I think it is of concern in
terms of judgment
for somebody who is not in a
position of power
to raise the sanctions issue.
I think the sanctions issue in
general is
a terrible mistake to even imply
that we would
withdraw from those sanctions.
But I guess more seriously here
is the issue
of just exactly what was
discussed.
And those issues are under
investigation,
both by the FBI, as well as the
Congress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Secretary
Panetta, let
me stay with you, because while
we wait to
learn the fate of General Flynn,
what David
Sanger and his colleagues are
reporting on
is the situation inside the
National Security
Council, the staff.
Is that typical for the early
days of a new
administration?
LEON PANETTA: No.
No, it certainly isn't.
I think the other quality that a
national
security adviser must have is
the ability
to set up procedures.
Look, he's an adviser.
He's staff.
He's not the president of the
United States.
His primary responsibility is to
set up the
procedures that would allow the
deputies to
meet, the principals to meet and
the National
Security Council in order for
them to move
forward recommendations to the
president of
the United States, who makes the
final decision.
As far as I know, none of those
processes
have been put in place.
We're almost a month into this
administration.
We're dealing with a number of
crises around
the world.
I think this is a very dangerous
moment not
to have those procedures in
place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, David
Sanger, what more
have you learned about why these
procedures
aren't in place, why there is
still so much
uncertainty on the part of
people working
for the National Security
Council?
DAVID SANGER: Well, I think part
of it, Judy,
is that what we're seeing happen
here is an
administration that came in
saying that it
would destroy the status quo,
that it got
elected to do something
different.
And it has brought in people who
it deliberately
chose for the fact that they
were outside
Washington.
But that meant that they didn't
have around
them the people who understood
how the system
worked.
And so you saw General Flynn
come in, I think,
without much of an
understanding, though he
had run the Defense Intelligence
Agency, of
how this coordinating role came
together.
And, you know, people who know
the NSC well
talk about the days when General
Brent Scowcroft
ran it for George H.W. Bush,
when others familiar
with how these organizations are
supposed
to come together, how you build
a staff, as
Secretary Panetta did at the CIA
and as chief
of staff.
And I think most of these folks
have come
in without that experience, and
then they
brought in Cabinet members who
largely came
from the business world, bring a
refreshing,
different view to this, but also
have no sense
of how the system is supposed to
run.
So, the basics, running deputies
committees
to make decisions and run those
up to the
principals, aren't happening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Secretary Panetta, what are the
risks in a
situation like this?
LEON PANETTA: Well, you're
running terrible
risks.
We saw a little bit of that over
the weekend
with the North Korean missile
launch and what
seemed to be the inability of
the White House
to respond definitively to what
had happened.
Those kinds of crises are going
to happen.
We're dealing with a number of
crises, whether
it's ISIS, whether it's Iran,
whether it's
North Korea, whether it's Russia
or China,
cyber-attacks.
There is a whole array of crises
out there.
If you don't have a mechanism in
the White
House that is able to deal with
those crises
in a thoughtful and careful way,
in order
to move options to the
president, then you're
going to have a very
hit-and-miss operation,
the kind that we're seeing now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Sanger, I
know this is
speculation, but if there were
someone to
come in to replace Michael Flynn
if he is
removed, how much difference
would that make,
based on your reporting?
DAVID SANGER: Well, it depends
on who it is,
whether you bring in somebody
else who might
have the confidence of the
president, but
not understand the NSC
procedures, or whether
you bring in somebody who has
done this before,
but might not fit in well with
that inner
team around the president.
And, of course, the most
important thing for
an NSC adviser is to have the
trust of the
president.
So people have named, for
example, Steve Hadley,
who was the national security
adviser under
George W. Bush in his second
term and had
been experienced in things like
this.
There are a few other
Republicans around who
have also had that experience.
But none of them have
connections to Mr. Trump.
And Mr. Trump seems to be mostly
impressed
these days with people who have
had either
military experience -- most of
the senior
directors he has appointed on
the NSC come
from the military -- or have
been very successful
in business.
And neither of those two
backgrounds, necessarily,
help you with what the NSC does.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And very quickly
to Secretary
Panetta, new person comes in,
can that turn
things around quickly?
LEON PANETTA: If that person has
experience
in terms of how the NSC is
supposed to operate,
then I think you can put in
place the procedures
that are required to do.
But that person is going to have
to have the
trust of the president first and
foremost.
And, if he has that, or she has
that, it can
work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary Leon
Panetta, David
Sanger, we thank you both.
Now: The integrity of a major
dam in California
comes under threat, after days
of historic
rainfall in the region.
William Brangham has our report.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At Northern
California's
Lake Oroville, home to the
nation's tallest
dam, water levels finally
receded, which stopped
the overflow of water from the
dam's emergency
spillway.
This reduced the risk of the
spillway's complete
collapse, which would've
triggered uncontrolled
flooding and threatened tens of
thousands
of homes below.
At a press conference, local
officials couldn't
answer why the system failed.
WILLIAM CROYLE, California
Department of Water
Resources: We're not sure
anything went wrong.
I think that the system has been
installed
since early 1960s.
It's been looked.
It's been monitored.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Today, they
faced a much
tamer scene than on Saturday.
Officials had to open the dam's
emergency
spillway for the first time in
50 years because
of record high water levels
caused by recent
heavy winter rain and snow.
When water was drained from the
dam's main
spillway, the huge volume eroded
chunks of
concrete and dug a 30-foot-deep
hole at its
base.
It was then that officials
opened the emergency
spillway.
When that water started eroding
the earthen
embankment, officials feared the
wall would
collapse altogether.
And so, on Sunday, authorities
ordered the
evacuation of nearly 200,000
people living
below the lake.
With little notice, residents
were stuck in
traffic for hours trying to
leave.
NANCY BORSDORF, Evacuee: I
panicked and just
started putting things in my
car, basically
my violin, a didgeridoo, some
family photos,
and I didn't grab enough
clothes.
I grabbed some wet laundry.
Can you believe that?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Mercury
News reports
that officials ignored warnings
about the
fragility of the emergency
spillway for years.
Back in 2005, environmental
groups warned
officials that this other
spillway -- quote
-- "didn't meet modern safety
standards."
For now, officials hope to drain
enough water
from the reservoir to make room
for the large
storm that's expected on
Wednesday.
For more on the threat at the
Oroville Dam,
I'm joined now by Jeffrey Mount.
He's senior fellow with the
Public Policy
Institute of California Water
Policy Center.
His research focuses on water
resources and
flood management.
Thank you very much for being
here.
So, Jeffrey, I understand that
the main threat
seems to have receded slightly.
I think people are still
evacuating as we
speak.
What was it that officials were
worried was
going to happen?
JEFFREY MOUNT, Public Policy
Institute of
California: Well, ultimately,
what the big
fear was, that there would be an
uncontrolled
release from the reservoir.
The worst nightmare of a
reservoir engineer
is to not be able to control the
water behind
the reservoir.
And the emergency spillway, had
it failed
and had it collapsed, would
basically have
lowered the lake level by almost
30 feet.
And that is a tremendous amount
of water in
a short period of time, which
would have resulted
in catastrophic flooding
downstream.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So the basic
issue here,
obviously, as we reported, is
too much rain,
too much snow, which I know is a
good thing
in California normally.
JEFFREY MOUNT: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But what is it
with regards
to the engineering that went
wrong here?
JEFFREY MOUNT: Well, so, we have
a couple
of things.
You have to remember that
California reservoirs
are under tension all the time.
We use them to store water.
And, of course, we're just
coming out of a
record drought.
We store water, but we also use
them to regulate
floods.
So you have to set aside some
space behind
the reservoir.
And in this case, there's not
much space set
behind this reservoir to catch
floods.
So, it filled.
And it filled pretty quickly.
And then we had to run water
down a spillway.
And we were forced to allow
water to go over
an emergency spill which had
never been tested
since the Oroville was built in
1968.
And things didn't go well when
the water went
over the spillway.
So we ended up with basically,
what you can
consider the fog of war in a
flood event.
You never quite know what is
going to happen.
And water has a way of testing
all the shortcomings
of your design and your actions.
And it did so in Oroville.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, as we
reported, there
is a hole that was carved out of
the main
spillway and concrete was
basically ripped
part by the volume of water.
JEFFREY MOUNT: Right.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: How are they
addressing
that issue now?
JEFFREY MOUNT: Well, they're not
addressing
it now.
They can't.
They can't do anything about it
because they
are running 100,000 cubic feet
per second
of water down that spillway now.
They will be able to address it
this summer,
and they don't know now what
they are going
to do about it.
But they have lost almost half
of that spillway.
Just the power of water tore it
to pieces
and moved it on down into the
river downstream.
There is really nothing they can
do today
about that spillway.
They have to use it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We mentioned
that there
had been some concerns raised
about the earthen
berm that is underneath the
auxiliary spillway.
Why is it that that wasn't
shored up?
Did people just not see that
this was going
to possibly be an issue?
JEFFREY MOUNT: No, I'm sure
people thought
it was an issue at the time.
But you are always faced with,
how much money
are you going to spend to
address something
that you think is going to be a
very, very
rare event?
And that's actually what happens
in reservoir
design, dam design anywhere.
You can spend an infinite amount
of money
to mitigate the most improbable
things, but
there still is a probability.
I think the big thing, big
takeaway here when
you look at this is that the
engineers probably
dismissed the idea of coating
that hillside
in concrete, because it would be
very, very
expensive to mitigate something
that was highly
unlikely to happen.
And it never happened before in
the dam's
history.
Well, now it happened.
And, frankly, all our climate
projections
for the future are suggesting
these kind of
events might be more frequent
and even more
intense.
So, for us here in California,
this is a bit
of a time to reflect on what we
are asking
our reservoirs to do and how we
manage them
and how we're going to prepare
for the future.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Jeffrey Mount
of the Public Policy Institute
of California,
thank you so much.
JEFFREY MOUNT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a rare look
at life under
the rule of the Nigerian
militant group Boko
Haram, as filmed by the group
itself.
Audie Cornish of NPR's "All
Things Considered"
recorded this conversation for
us last week.
AUDIE CORNISH: Last year, Voice
of America
News Service, which is funded by
the U.S.
government, received a stunning
trove of videos
from Nigeria, 18 hours of
footage recorded
by Boko Haram's own cameras in
2014.
The pictures comes from
Northeastern Nigeria.
Now, at the time, Boko Haram had
total control
of the region.
The videos take us behind Boko
Haram's assault
on the Nigerian military and
into villages
where their leaders administer
rough justice.
VOA has produced a series of
four reports
based on the videos.
And joining me to talk about
what we can learn
from these images is VOA's
Ibrahim Ahmed.
He hosts a weekly program for
their service
broadcast in Nigeria.
Thank you for joining us.
IBRAHIM AHMED, Voice of America:
It's my pleasure.
AUDIE CORNISH: Now, tell us a
little bit about
how you were able to verify
these videos.
IBRAHIM AHMED: When the Voice of
America got
these videos, first of all, we
sat down and
went through almost all of them.
And we were able to determine
that they came
from not Northeastern Nigeria
because the
people in the videos speak in
Kanuri, which
is the predominant language
there, and which
is also the language of most of
the Boko Haram
leadership and the members.
That was the first thing.
Then there are references to
Boko Haram and
to events that only Boko Haram
will know,
like the attacks carried in some
areas of
Northeastern Nigeria.
AUDIE CORNISH: Your reporting
shows a couple
of things, one, the faces of
some leaders
and participates in Boko Haram,
which I understand
is very uncommon.
It also shows how they are able
to basically
bring whole villages into their
ideology using
violence.
And in one clip, there is a
tribunal where
they exert their justice.
How do these tribunals work?
IBRAHIM AHMED: Well, in order to
control the
people, when Boko Haram captures
a place and
they want to bring people in
line, they will
hold these kind of tribunals.
And they will force everybody
from the village
or the town to attend the
tribunals.
They will bring people they're
accusing, whether
they are drug users or drug
sellers, according
to them.
They will bring them to these
tribunals, and
they will read out a statement
that you are
guilty of this or guilty of
that.
Do you accept your guilt?
Well, if you accept it, fine.
You just go and lay down and get
killed.
AUDIE CORNISH: They do something
similar with
young boys and men who they
conscript into
fighting.
You have a video that is
unusual, in that
it shows a Boko Haram leader
basically getting
everyone to gear up to fight.
Let's watch that.
NARRATOR: Awaz (ph) says the
best of the martyrs
are those that fight in the
front.
They are the ones who do not
turn back until
they are killed.
IBRAHIM AHMED: When Boko Haram
started in
2009, initially, their
membership were made
up of the original followers of
the (INAUDIBLE)
Boko Haram.
But when they started capturing
territory,
they started conscripting
people.
AUDIE CORNISH: There is video of
a failed
attack, essentially, on an army
barracks.
And you see fighters looking for
weapons.
You see fighters not necessarily
able to use
the weapons they have.
What are the fighting
capabilities of Boko
Haram at this point?
IBRAHIM AHMED: Initially, Boko
Haram was kind
of going into fights with the
military with
much more powerful weapons then
what the military
had.
The military had AK-47 rifles,
while the militants
come with heavy machine guns,
anti-aircraft
guns.
So, the military had to run away
at the time.
But, in 2015, the present
government in Nigeria,
when they started taking the
fight to Boko
Haram, they were able to adapt
themselves
and to get those kind of weapons
that Boko
Haram was using on them.
And that is when they started
winning the
war and kicking Boko Haram out
of these major
cities and towns.
AUDIE CORNISH: Do you feel as
though these
are areas that can rebuild?
IBRAHIM AHMED: It is possible,
but it's going
to be really difficult, because
the crisis
or the carnage that Boko Haram
has done in
the area is just unbelievable.
AUDIE CORNISH: Ibrahim Ahmed of
Voice of America,
thank you so much for speaking
with us.
IBRAHIM AHMED: Thank you so
much.
My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we near the
gruesome sixth
anniversary of the war in Syria,
daily documents
of the carnage there now flood
the Internet.
Photos and videos posted by both
civilians
and combatants catalogue the
shocking depths
of human cruelty and possible
war crimes.
Now human rights investigators
are increasingly
turning to the Internet to track
what's happening,
not only in Syria, but in other
conflict zones.
As part of our Breakthroughs
coverage of invention
and innovation, special
correspondent Cat
Wise reports on a new university
program training
students to become human rights
investigators
in the digital age.
And a warning: This story
contains some disturbing
images.
CAT WISE: For decades, human
rights investigators
have relied on tools like
shovels and backhoes
to uncover mass graves and mass
atrocities
in places like Bosnia, Iraq, and
Rwanda.
But in today's smartphone-filled
world, videos
and images of people killed or
suffering thousands
of miles away take only a couple
of clicks
to find on YouTube, Facebook,
Twitter.
The front lines of human rights
work have
shifted in the digital age, and
a new generation
of investigators is beginning to
employ high-tech
tools.
STUDENT: We can probably
screen-shot that.
STUDENT: Yes.
STUDENT: And reverse-image it.
STUDENT: And we should look up
the name of
that pharmacy.
STUDENT: Can anyone translate
that?
CAT WISE: These students are
part of the recently
launched Human Rights
Investigations Lab at
the University of California,
Berkeley's Human
Rights Center.
The university and partner
organization Amnesty
International are training the
students to
verify videos and other publicly
available
social media content coming out
of areas like
Syria, where human rights
violations have
been occurring.
For the first time, students are
using open
source investigation methods
used previously
by journalists and human rights
professionals.
YOUSTINA YOUSSEF, Student: Oh,
those are uniforms.
CAT WISE: Youstina Youssef is a
20-year-old
political science major in the
program.
She's become a highly skilled
digital detective.
And her native language, Arabic,
also comes
in handy.
Youssef grew up in Cairo, Egypt.
She and her family are Coptic
Christians,
a religious minority in Egypt.
They came to the U.S. in 2010
shortly before
the revolution began.
YOUSTINA YOUSSEF: I didn't have
a minute of
hesitation about this.
I jumped right on it.
I think it has a lot to do with
my background
of coming from Egypt, being a
regular person,
and then being affected by the
political scene
in the country, and having your
life upended.
This project gives me an outlet,
gives me
a way to feel like I am
contributing in some
way.
ALEXA KOENIG, Executive
Director, Berkeley
Human Rights Center: Welcome to
the spring
2017 launch of the Human Rights
Investigations
Lab.
CAT WISE: The 60-plus student
volunteers are
a diverse group from different
majors and
the law school.
They speak more than 20
languages.
Alexa Koenig is the executive
director of
Berkeley's Human Rights Center.
She says the lab was a natural
progression
for the organization, which has
been advancing
human rights work, around the
world, for more
than 20 years.
ALEXA KOENIG: We have noticed
over and over
that there are a number of
front-line human
rights advocates that are really
trying to
figure out, how do you ensure
that the videos
they're getting from survivors
on the ground
are what they purport to be?
So, one of the things we were
thinking is,
couldn't we leverage our
position here to
provide the labor that so many
of these organizations
really can't afford, but also
provide a pipeline
of students who are skilled in
an area that's
increasingly in demand,
front-line human rights
workers?
CAT WISE: And it appears the
human rights
movement is eager for help.
Since the lab began in
September, students
have been asked by Amnesty and
other groups
to look at material coming out
of Yemen, Sudan,
Democratic Republic of Congo,
and Myanmar.
But the bulk of their work has
been focused
on Syria, specifically Aleppo.
HALEY WILLIS, Student: This is
very deep in
Aleppo.
CAT WISE: Haley Willis is a
sophomore in the
program from Texas.
She showed me one of the key
methods she and
the other students use to verify
videos.
HALEY WILLIS: Geolocation is
essentially,
did this take place where it
says it took
place?
We're really used to being able
to say, here's
this store, and you type it into
Google, you
get an address, and you're done.
In Syria, there's not easily
accessible addresses.
There's no Google Street View.
In this particular video, the
thing that stood
out to me the most is a white
dome sticking
out from behind this building
right here.
CAT WISE: Oh, I see that.
HALEY WILLIS: That is a good
place to start
for geolocating, because a dome
is round.
That's a very distinct shape
that you will
be able to see from above.
CAT WISE: Wills then began
looking for a needle
in a haystack: a tiny dome in
pre-war satellite
images of Aleppo.
HALEY WILLIS: I combed through
this neighborhood,
and I basically looked for every
white circular
object that I saw.
I ended up narrowing it down to
about two.
You can't always be 100 percent
sure, and
you should never say you're 100
percent sure
unless you are.
CAT WISE: After getting as far
as they can,
the students turn over their
research to the
partner organizations for final
analysis.
Screening hours and hours of
disturbing images
can obviously take a toll.
It's an issue that's taken very
seriously
within the program.
SAM DUBBERLEY, Amnesty
International: The
most important thing you can do
to look after
yourself personally is just have
awareness,
understanding how you normally
respond to
things and how are you
responding after spending
a couple of hours looking at and
verifying
videos.
CAT WISE: Sam Dubberley works
for Amnesty
International.
The lab partnership with
Berkeley was actually
his idea.
He's now running three similar
programs at
universities in South Africa,
the United Kingdom,
and Canada, and each group is
required to
go through regular resiliency
training.
SAM DUBBERLEY: Just watching a
video without
sound is actually less
distressing than watching
it with sound.
And very often, the audio is not
necessarily
important for verification.
It's very important to us to
make sure the
students are trained and given a
safe environment,
so that they do not suffer any
adverse effects
of trauma.
The reality is, the world of
human rights
investigation requires you to
look at this
content today.
So, if in two years' time, three
years' time,
you want to move into that
field, I think
it's very good for them that
they actually
understand the skills and the
resiliency required
to do this job.
CAT WISE: Under that guided
leadership, the
students have been cranking
away, more than
1,500 hours of verification work
thus far.
And some of that work has even
made it all
the way to the United Nations,
according to
Syrian activist Hadi Al Khatib.
HADI AL KHATIB, Syrian Activist:
The students
found a specific type of cluster
munitions
that has been used in Aleppo
City and its
countryside.
And this has been all included
in a verified
data set that we have sent to
the U.N.
CAT WISE: Al Khatib runs an
organization called
the Syrian Archive.
He and his colleagues are
creating a large
database of verified videos
documenting human
rights violations on all sides
since the start
of the Syrian civil war.
I spoke to him on Skype about
why he asked
Berkeley for help.
HADI AL KHATIB: With the
archive, we have
about more than 3,800 videos
that have been
verified.
We still have a backlog of more
than 30,000
of videos that we need to go
through.
So this is why we need the help
of Berkeley
university students.
CAT WISE: But the big question,
of course,
on the minds of both the
students and others
doing this type of work: Will
any of it actually
be presented in an international
court of
law one day?
Could a YouTube video lead to
the downfall
of a leader?
BEN TAUB, "The New Yorker": If
there is no
geopolitical will to actually
help people,
then you can have all the videos
in the world,
and it won't actually garner
support to save
people's lives.
CAT WISE: Ben Taub is a
contributing writer
at "The New Yorker" who has
written extensively
about human rights violations in
Syria.
We caught up with him recently
on the Columbia
University campus, where he
talked about the
pluses and minuses of open
source evidence.
BEN TAUB: It's extremely useful
for advocacy.
It's also extremely useful for
putting the
crimes before the international
community
to try to garner the kind of
political pressure
that could result in a trial
taking place
to begin with.
But it doesn't necessarily link
the actor
that you're trying to prosecute
to the crime.
Footage of, for instance, a
hospital being
blown up doesn't show that that
was ordered
by Assad or by his highest-level
security
committee.
The kind of evidence that really
would get
them would be a document, an
order, something
that's signed.
CAT WISE: That's an issue that
is very much
on the mind of the Human Rights
Center's Alexa
Koenig.
ALEXA KOENIG: One of the biggest
hurdles about
using these new methods is that
they are so
new.
So, judges often don't know how
to evaluate,
and give any kind of weight to
information
you're pulling off Facebook, or
Twitter, or
these other platforms.
One of the things we're hoping
to do for kind
of investing in the long-term
use of these
methods is just begin to build
an international
standard for how to evaluate
what constitutes
an effective and a good
investigation.
CAT WISE: In the months ahead,
the students
will continue their work on
Syria and start
new projects in Africa and
Central America.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Berkeley,
California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just over three
weeks into
the Trump administration, and,
as you heard
earlier, reports aren't going
away of disarray
inside the White House.
For more, we turn to our
Politics Monday team,
Tamara Keith of NPR and Amy
Walter of The
Cook Political Report.
Thank you both for being here.
So, Tam and Amy, we did talk
earlier about
what is happening to General
Flynn, the president
himself weighing in.
So, Tam, you were at the White
House this
afternoon.
What is the latest on that?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Yes.
So I was at the White House
waiting to hopefully
talk to Sean Spicer, the press
secretary,
when the president walked by an
area where
there were about a dozen, maybe
10 reporters
waiting to see Spicer.
The president shows up.
And reporters asked the
president, do you
have confidence in General
Flynn?
What is General Flynn's status?
And he said, "Oh, there's a
statement coming."
Then someone else shouted, how
about Reince
Priebus, the chief of staff?
Do you have confidence in Reince
Priebus?
And he says: "Reince is doing
great.
Reince is doing great."
So there is a real contrast
there between
saying, oh, there is a statement
coming, a
statement that says that the
president is
evaluating the situation, and
saying that
the chief of staff is doing
great.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A contrast
between what he
says about General Flynn and
what he says
about Reince Priebus.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But also, Amy, a
contrast about
what they are saying just an
hour after Kellyanne
Conway, the president's
counselor, said that
the president had full
confidence in General
Flynn.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Although,
Judy, you know this.
That is a classic line that
folks in Washington
use, like they use the, he's
taking time off
to spend time with his family.
So, they use -- they throw that
line out there.
It's really not very definitive.
But, look, the issue with Flynn
is as much
about the frustration within the
White House
about the fact that he made at
least two very
high-ranking members of that
administration,
the vice president and the chief
of staff,
look like they lied.
They gave information out on
television that
wasn't truthful.
And it came directly from
Michael Flynn.
That seems like the bigger
question here than
whether or not we can talk about
a specific
law being broken about the fact
that he talked
to the Russians before he was
officially in
his position.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will see
what happens
about General Flynn and whether
he stays in
his job.
But, meantime, Tamara, just
quickly, there
has been speculation about
Reince Priebus.
There have been stories out
there in the last
few days about whether he is on
thin ice,
whether Sean Spicer, the press
secretary,
is on thin ice.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, how
stable are some
of these top advisers to the
president?
TAMARA KEITH: It's not clear.
I think there has been a lot of
self-interested
leaking coming out of that White
House and
a lot of administration
officials saying things
about other administration
officials, and,
you know, friends of the
president saying
things.
And it's all very hazy.
There is some thought that
President Trump
likes to keep people on edge.
But this is a lot of noise and
commotion and
distraction from what are some
pretty major
issues that the president ran on
and could
be pursuing.
But, you know, like, for
instance, they don't
fully have an answer yet on what
they're going
to do about his immigration ban.
They haven't sent any
legislation over to
Congress.
AMY WALTER: And that's the real
issue here,
is whether or not this is just
about internal
fighting and that they are not
particularly
stable is one thing, just stable
internally
in terms of the functioning.
Whether this impedes their
ability to actually
get stuff done is the real
question.
So, does it matter?
It matters if it matters, right?
If the lack of clear lines of
delineation,
if the infighting is preventing
them from
actually putting legislation on
the Hill,
getting an Obamacare
replacement, passing
tax law, then it is a very big
deal.
If it is just -- and, again,
remember, this
is a president who ran -- as a
candidate,
his campaign looked exactly like
this.
So the chaos is something that
he is either
likes or thinks is important,
but it didn't
deter him and it didn't stop him
from winning
in the first place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Someone who has
been speaking
very emphatically for the White
House -- and
I want to ask both of you about
this -- is
the president's -- one of his
senior policy
advisers, Stephen Miller.
Tam, he went on four of the
Sunday talk show,
interview shows yesterday, went
after the
judiciary, the courts, backed up
the president.
He was attacked on the courts.
At one point, he said the powers
of the president
are substantial and will not be
questioned.
And when he was asked
specifically about -- to
defend the president's criticism
of the courts,
here's what Stephen Miller said.
And this was on ABC "This Week."
STEPHEN MILLER, Senior Trump
Policy Adviser:
We have equal branches of
government in this
country.
The judiciary is not supreme.
A district judge in Seattle
cannot force the
president of the United States
to change our
laws and our Constitution
because of their
own personal views.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, we have
here someone
saying that the president
doesn't have to
obey the courts?
Is that what it sounds like?
AMY WALTER: Well, there is
certainly something,
in the way he said it, that
makes it come
across like that.
But there is also an argument
that the White
House is making that they do
have grounds
to make, which is, the president
does have
a lot of authority, if you look
at the statute
regarding immigration, on
national security
issues, that it is there, and
that the courts,
while they can make judgments,
as they did
in this Ninth Circuit, on other
issues, the
president does have a lot of
latitude.
And that is where this fight
should be.
But the bottom line is, it goes
back to the
dysfunction within the office.
Had this executive order been
written more
cleanly, had the rollout gone
better, had
they made changes to it, we
might not be where
we are now, having a fight over
what the role
of the court is in this, because
it wouldn't
have gotten there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Tam, these
statements
yesterday -- I watched all of
those interviews
that Stephen Miller did.
He seems to be clearly
expressing the frustration
from the president.
TAMARA KEITH: Well, and the
president tweeted
that Stephen Miller did a great
job.
He went out there and channeled
the president.
He went out there and said
exactly what the
White House wanted to be said.
And, you know, that wins you
support from
the president of the United
States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, the
other thing
he said, and I want to -- if we
have time,
I want to play this clip.
He was asked -- I want to see if
I can find
it now.
He was asked about -- now I
won't be able
to find it it.
So, we can't...
TAMARA KEITH: Oh, was it
about...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sorry.
It's about the president's
legacy.
He was asked a question about
Ivanka Trump,
the president defending her work
and criticizing
Nordstrom, the department store.
George Stephanopoulos, the ABC
anchor, asked
him about that.
And here is how Stephen Miller
turned the
corner.
STEPHEN MILLER: I really hope,
George, we
can move on to discussing things
that the
American people care about, like
their jobs,
like their wages, like their
security, like
the fact that we have a
president who has
done more in three weeks than
most presidents
have done in an entire
administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, more
than -- in three
weeks more than other presidents
in an entire
administration.
AMY WALTER: Not the most recent
president.
President Obama at this point,
literally on
this day, the Senate passed his
stimulus bill.
And that was soon going to be
signed into
law.
So, we haven't seen anything
even get up to
the Hill, nonetheless a major
piece of legislation
getting passed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But to say the
president has
done more in three weeks than an
entire administration,
that is quite a statement.
TAMARA KEITH: That is quite a
statement.
But, also, President Obama, by
this point,
had signed more executive orders
than President
Trump has signed.
There are a number of metrics to
measure this.
Superlatives are always
perilous.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what is for
sure is,
there is nothing quiet about
this White House.
All right, Tamara Keith, Amy
Walter, thank
you both.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: An iconic
American fashion
designer tells his story.
Tommy Hilfiger talked with our
Jeffrey Brown
at the Miami Book Fair about his
new book,
"American Dreamer: My Life in
the Fashion
Business."
It is the latest edition to the
"NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why write a
memoir?
Why did you stop life and write
this thing?
TOMMY HILFIGER, Author,
"American Dreamer:
My Life in the Fashion
Business": Look, I
had been asked to write it over
the years
by a few different people.
And I kept saying, no, no, no, I
think I will
wait until I'm much older.
And then it dawned on me that I
might forget
a lot in my later years.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
TOMMY HILFIGER: My mind is very
fresh now.
I have got a lot of energy, so I
thought,
you know what, for my children's
sake, I would
like to take the reader through
my journey
chronologically.
JEFFREY BROWN: You talk about
coming of age
in the '60s.
Did you know what you wanted to
do early,
at the beginning?
TOMMY HILFIGER: I didn't know
what I wanted
to do.
And what I really didn't know
was that I was
dyslexic.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
TOMMY HILFIGER: And my grades
were very, very
poor in school.
So, I really thought I was one
of the dumb
ones.
And I think my teachers also
agreed with that,
and certainly my father, who
held the bar
very high for me, agreed with
that.
And then, when this whole music
revolution
came about, I was obsessed with
the Beatles,
the Rolling Stones, Hendrix, all
of the rock
groups and rock stars.
And I thought, well, I want to
be a rock star.
But I really couldn't play and I
couldn't
sing.
But I looked like...
JEFFREY BROWN: So far, you were
millions...
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: The rest of us,
right?
We all wanted to be rock stars,
yes.
TOMMY HILFIGER: But I looked the
part.
I had long hair, bell bottoms.
And a lot of my friends wanted
to know where
I got my clothes.
And a couple of other buddies
and I put together
our $150 we had saved from
working part-time
jobs, bought 20 pairs of jeans
and opened
a shop, at 18 years old.
JEFFREY BROWN: Really?
At that moment, was there a plan
or a future
that you envisioned?
Or was this just sort of making
it up as you
go along?
TOMMY HILFIGER: Making it up as
we went along.
I thought, if I could build my
own brand,
I could do whatever I want to do
with it.
I could design it myself.
I could market it the way I want
to market
it.
I was born in Elmira, New York,
a very small
town in Upstate New York.
So, I thought, if I move to New
York City,
I could really begin to plant
seeds to build
my own brand.
I wanted to build a brand that
that was creative
and exciting and unique.
But I wanted to make it into a
real business.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
TOMMY HILFIGER: And I wanted to
distinguish
my look from everyone else's.
I decided that I should create
new American
classics.
So, I looked at all of the
preppy clothes
I had worn as a very young boy.
And I thought they were very
boring and very
tired.
So, I said, OK, Well, how do I
redesign these?
JEFFREY BROWN: Can you sum up
what you didn't
like most of all?
TOMMY HILFIGER: I didn't like
the fit.
I didn't like the feel of the
fabric.
I didn't like that it was too
mediocre, so
to speak.
So, I thought, I'm going to make
everything,
like, relaxed, colorful,
detailed.
But I wanted to build it for a
broad audience.
And I wanted it to be as
aspirational, affordable,
accessible.
JEFFREY BROWN: The book takes us
through a
lot of success, but, of course,
a lot of problems
along the way as well.
TOMMY HILFIGER: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Were there
moments where you
thought, this isn't going to
work?
TOMMY HILFIGER: A couple of
times.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
TOMMY HILFIGER: I mean, once in
particular,
I thought, I should just hang it
up, because
I was being ridiculed, and I
thought I had
made this enormous mistake by
doing this advertising
campaign created by this
advertising genius,
George Lois.
He said, look, you just need one
ad.
You need one ad to allow the
public to at
least learn your name.
So, he created this ad campaign
that compared
me with all the big names in the
business.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
TOMMY HILFIGER: And when we ran
that, it was
very controversial.
But people learned that there
was a Tommy
Hilfiger fashion designer out
there, and they
should go look at the clothes.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Why is fashion
important?
Or is it important?
I mean, what is it, in the end,
do you think?
TOMMY HILFIGER: Look, there are
many more
important things in life than
fashion.
But fashion, to me, is part of
pop culture.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
TOMMY HILFIGER: And I'm an art
collector.
I'm obsessed with art and pop
culture.
And I say that there is FAME,
F-A-M-E, fashion,
art, music and entertainment,
including celebrity,
that really moves the needle in
society.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Looking back at your whole life,
right, and
you are remembering, does that
young kid seem
like you?
I mean, do you see a clear
thread from when
you went back to look up to
today?
TOMMY HILFIGER: Yes, because I
was always
a very positive-thinking person.
I mean, other than a couple of
moments in
time, I always thought that,
some way, I'm
going to make it.
I'm just going to make it.
And I'm not going to give up.
And I'm going to realize that
dream.
So, I never gave up.
And I have realized the dream,
and I enjoy
every moment of every day.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, well,
the book is
"American Dreamer: My Life in
the Fashion
Business."
Tommy Hilfiger, thank you very
much.
TOMMY HILFIGER: Thank you very
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Since
the early 1990s, scientists have
known that
the sun's surface rotates more
slowly than
its interior.
But they haven't been able to
pinpoint why.
Now astrophysicists at the
University of Hawaii
say they have a hunch.
You can read about that on our
home page.
Plus: Two fathers turned to
poetry to teach
their children about growing up
black in America.
You can find that and more at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.